API Paradigms and Implementations (#2)
apisyouwonthate/build-apis-2: 5-further-theory/1-picking-paradigms.adoc

= Picking Paradigms

TODO This should probably go at the end of the book?

> During my time at WeWork it became important for folks to figure out which paradigm they should use for a specific API being planned. Initially the plan was to create a diagram purely point folks to the appropriate paradigm, but that gets really open-ended. For example, you might want to ask if having a type-system is important for the messages, but some implementations and standards from all three mentioned paradigms use types, and some do not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During my time at WeWork it became important for folks to figure out which paradigm they should use for a specific API being planned. Initially the plan was to create a diagram purely to point folks to the appropriate paradigm, but that gets really open-ended. For example, you might want to ask if having a type-system is important for the messages, but some implementations and standards from all three mentioned paradigms use types, and some do not.
```

Making the decision between paradigms alone was so vague it was useless, and trying to consider all implementations just sounded awful (XML-RPC, JSON-RPC, SOAP, SPARQL, FIQL, Micro, … 😴).

Instead we went with gRPC, REST, and GraphQL.
A quick guide to picking an approach for your next API, in the form of a decision flow diagram.

> Wait, what is that "context boundary" thing all about?! Basically, it’s the idea that whenever a the line is crossed between any imaginary boundary, a few more layers of abstraction should be used to help with the longevity of the system. REST provides those layers of abstraction, and GraphQL provides a few too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wait, what is that "context boundary" thing all about?! Basically, it’s the idea that whenever a line is crossed between any imaginary boundary, a few more layers of abstraction should be used to help with the longevity of the system. REST provides those layers of abstraction, and GraphQL provides a few too.
```

> That boundary could be as simple as another team/department/company, or a group of systems that just shouldn’t know about each other. Things within the context can treat their own APIs like "private classes" in programming languages, they can change whenever they want, spin up and down, delete, evolve, change, who cares. When going to another context… probably use things like REST (with Hypermedia and JSON Schema) to help those clients last longer without needing developer involvement for most change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That boundary could be as simple as another team/department/company, or a group of systems that just shouldn’t know about each other. Things within the context can treat their own APIs like "private classes" in programming languages, they can change whenever they want, spin up and down, delete, evolve, change, who cares. When going to another context… probably use things like REST (with Hypermedia and JSON Schema) to help those clients last longer without needing developer involvement for most changes.
```

> This bounded context bit is really the crux of a lot of the deciding between when to use gRPC, and when to use something else. Internally you can do whatever you want, but when there’s a chance that the developers involved in clients and servers not in close communication (when they have other priorities in the sprint, are on a work retreat, or literally don’t know each other or have any way to communicate), these layers of abstraction become a lot more useful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This bounded context bit is really the crux of a lot of the deciding between when to use gRPC, and when to use something else. Internally you can do whatever you want, but when there’s a chance that the developers involved in clients and servers are not in close communication (when they have other priorities in the sprint, are on a work retreat, or literally don’t know each other or have any way to communicate), these layers of abstraction become a lot more useful.
```

> Pushing client-side validation to JSON Schema, for instance, is a layer of abstraction that REST allows (and you could totally do in your own RPC APIs if not using gRPC).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pushing client-side validation to JSON Schema, for instance, is a layer of abstraction that REST allows (and you could totally do it in your own RPC APIs if not using gRPC).
```

Another example would be pushing workflows and resource state to the API instead of having your RPC clients have to try and figure it out by looking at random properties.

> The when here is important, because should every API be REST or RESTish? Hell no! But REST is very important for more use-cases than folks seem to think these days.

Reviewer: Not sure this sentence makes sense... ?

Author: Ignore this whoooole file. It's just comingn along for the ride.

> GraphQL fits in here when the more important parts of REST are not relevant, and the shape of clients is super different from each other. We’ve not been recommending it actively at WeWork, and one of the two teams using it has ditched the thing, but I do expect to see it pop up after making this diagram part of our API design guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GraphQL fits in here when the more important parts of REST are not relevant, and the shape of clients is super different from each other. We’ve not been recommending it actively at WeWork, and one of the two teams using it has ditched the thing, but I would expect to see it pop up after making this diagram part of the API design guide.
```

Implementations

gRPC and GraphQL have officially approved implementations for a wide array of languages, so use those as a starting point.

    gRPC
    GraphQL

> For those of you not working at WeWork (we’re hiring, get in touch!), there is a bunch of REST tooling floating around that’s not awful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For those of you not working at WeWork, there is a bunch of REST tooling floating around that’s not awful.
```
